---
layout: post
title: The Game Developer's Rabbit Hole
---

A very common warning to game developers choosing to make a game without the aid of a big-box tool such as Unity, Unreal, or Godot is to avoid the trap of becoming an engine developer. That is, a game developer with a vision shouldn't waste what can become years on building the tech stack to support it. Though I don't consider myself a game developer, my ocean simulation project has certainly thrown me down this rabbit hole, and I've ended up building a [rendering engine](https://github.com/James51332/Vision) (~20,000 lines of code) with little to show for it.

<!--more-->

After gaining an understanding of the Fourier transform, I was prepared to use it to improve my ocean simulation. However, I naively thought that my current project was doomed. This is because I thought that I would need to exploit the parallelism of GPU to get reasonable performance out of the FFT. However, my project was built in OpenGL, which only supports compute shaders in versions 4.3 and forward. In itself, this was not a problem. However, Apple has discontinued supported for OpenGL, and only has driver support up to version 4.1. As a macOS developer, was I really out of options?

Thankfully, Apple hadn't totally crushed my hopes. Compute shaders are well supported in Apple's own flavor of a rendering API: *Metal*. There were several ways that I could have taken advantage of their tool. I could've resorted to a game engine, which would natively target Metal and OpenGL. I could have used [MoltenVK](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/MoltenVK) to write my renderer in Vulkan for all platforms. However, I was intimidated by the verbosity of Vulkan and unhappy taking advantage of a game engine. I chose what was possibly the worst option.

I decided to create my own rendering abstraction that could run on top of both OpenGL and Metal. The only problem is that these APIs are quite different, and the shaders aren't even written in the same language. Nonetheless, I have spent what has become two months designing the abstracted API, and implementing on top of both of the underlying graphics APIs. Thankfully, I'm proud of how for it is has come. The engine boasts an impressive shader compilation, transpilation, and reflection system. Shaders are written in GLSL and automatically compiled to SPIRV and transpiled to Metal so that the swap between them is almost unnoticeable. However, this period has been largely unnecessary to my actual goal of creating an ocean simulation.